I'll keep out the really juicy details
cue-2
Anything that you don't want recorded just say that
cue-3
you want it off the record and we can take it offoh it's okay - I have the habit of being pretty open about my opinions and everything so it's a it's all fine
cue-4
Welcome everyone
cue-5
For the meeting today we are delighted to have J.-S. Caux with us for a discussion
cue-6
on SciPost and
cue-7
to
cue-8
talk a little bit about
cue-9
the Scholarly Commons too and share
cue-10
cue-11
share some perspectives
cue-12
yeah
cue-13
Does everyone have the link to the agenda?
cue-14
yeah
cue-15
okay super
cue-16
so as we go along feel free to add either to the agenda
cue-17
and we also have a
cue-18
a document that we started on SciPost
cue-19
and
cue-20
do I need to share that link as well? If you have a copy of the agenda you can there is a link on there to the SciPost document
cue-21
so
cue-22
any questions about
cue-23
those things before we move forward?
cue-24
Maybe since this is our first meeting together what if
cue-25
we took a minute to introduce ourselves
cue-26
that would be great for mewould that be okay?
cue-27
yes
cue-28
So J.-S., since you're our guest, why don't you go firstokay so my name is Jean-Sébastien Caux, but like I like discussed with Chris you can just call me J.-S. - keep it simple
cue-29
so I'm a professor of theoretical physics at the university of Amsterdam and I've been there for quite awhile. I'm originally Canadian but then I studied in the UK for a few years and moved to the Netherlands about fifteen years ago
cue-30
so I'm working professionally as a scientist - that's my day job, it's already over a full time job. I have quite a big research group for a theorist - got kind of grants to keep a large army of PhD students and postdocs running, so I have little time for hobbies, so I choose my hobbies carefully. A couple of years ago I decided to refocus all my hobbies on the question of reform of the scientific publishing business and that's essentially what led to the creation of SciPost that we'll be talking about today. So essentially I work at my good hundred hours a week
cue-31
you know half of that or a little bit more is for my science and the rest is for SciPost
cue-32
that's the important thing you need to know about me for today
cue-33
great thank you J. S.
cue-34
I can go next. My name is Chris Chapman and
cue-35
I have been I'm coming at this from the perspective of
cue-36
the researcher and
cue-37
an entrepreneur
cue-38
in the sense of trying to
cue-39
create tools
cue-40
or mechanisms that could help
cue-41
change the world as far as research goes so
cue-42
I am co founder of a company called Pentandra
cue-43
and
cue-44
I have the interesting perspective of being of thinking about this kind of from a for profit perspective to see if
cue-45
what
cue-46
overlap there is from that perspective so I'm looking forward to some good discussion about that
cue-47
yeah
cue-48
who else would like to introduce themselves?
cue-49
I guess I can go next. So my name is Ivar Martin
cue-50
I am also a theoretical physicist.
cue-51
I work Argon national labs so that's my day job
cue-52
and
cue-53
and I guess with similar motivation to JS, I started a project Knowen.org
cue-54
a few years ago which is the kind of mixed of Wikipedia, stack overflow
cue-55
so essentially it's a collaboration tool but at the same time
cue-56
potentially could work as perhaps a next generation publishing tool
cue-57
I can go next.
cue-58
This is David farmer. I'm a mathematician. I work at the American Institute of Mathematics.
cue-59
My day job is a mixture of administration and research.
cue-60
In my spare time I think a lot about online textbooks and making good online versions like HTML versions of research papers and about accessibility,
cue-61
and about how to make it easier for authors to put high quality materials online.
cue-62
Thanks David. And Katie?
cue-63
are you on?And I'm Katie - yeah, I'm here.
cue-64
I'm Katie and I'm the other half of Chris'
cue-65
same
cue-66
company and also his wife and
cue-67
I come at this from a very different perspective than most. I am not a researcher by trade or specific
cue-68
lettered training. I am the coming at this more from a perspective of a citizen scientist, and
cue-69
a researcher by curiosity rather than by trade
cue-70
so
cue-71
that that
cue-72
alters a lot of the way I see some of
cue-73
the things that we talk about.
cue-74
Great thank you everyone!
cue-75
Okay so moving moving down into the
cue-76
meat of our discussion today. So a little bit of background for JS on what we're trying to accomplish here: it's
cue-77
it's kind of - for this project we're working under the assumption that if someone is starting something new
cue-78
they see a problem that needs to be solved, so we're inviting
cue-79
leaders of these projects to come and chat with us about what they see
cue-80
in order to better illuminate the problem space that the Scholarly Commons needs to solve.
cue-81
Some of the workshops that we did did kind of a high-level
cue-82
perspective of what what kinds of
cue-83
social or cultural elements we we would like Scholarly Commons to kind of answer,
cue-84
so what we're doing with this is is looking at more from the technical side, though there is definite overlap in
cue-85
in all other areas.
cue-86
On
cue-87
what are these
cue-88
the new and innovative types of things, or people that are trying to solve problems, what what is it that they see so we can get a richer understanding
cue-89
of what the Scholarly Commons should
cue-90
should achieve. So
cue-91
with that, kind of the the process as we look at each of these topics is is
cue-92
to go a little deeper than than the
cue-93
this the the normal marketing pitch of a project, but try to understand
cue-94
some of the deeper motivation for why you're why you created SciPost, some of the problems that you are
cue-95
cue-96
trying to solve
cue-97
and
cue-98
and to do that,
cue-99
how, and this is kind of an evolving process as we're understanding how to do it, but
cue-100
we're having a series of calls and and I I don't know what your schedule is but
cue-101
you're welcome to come and join.
cue-102
cue-103
We kind of envision seeing over the next two or three weeks trying to get to some of these deeper issues,
cue-104
so if you or any one of your team is able to join for that time
cue-105
you would be we would be delighted to have you.Okay, yeah, no that sounds great, and if I understand correctly you usually meet on Tuesdays like this?Right. We usually meet at this time every week.okay so I can see I mean the
cue-106
I'll see in the coming weeks whether I can drill a hole in my agenda to make that possible, but if not I might be able to delegate that somebody within my organization soSuper - yeahthat's very possible - okay.
cue-107
That would be great.
cue-108
So as you can see we
cue-109
have started a document on SciPost. We started that last week just kind of looking at your website and
cue-110
and as we looked and had questions we added them to this list.
cue-111
But before we get to that why don't we have you give a
cue-112
cue-113
kind of a brief introduction to the SciPost project from your perspective and then
cue-114
then we can go from there.Okay so I mean there are there any things to use as kind of a starting points. Maybe I can do a very short history of how it came about.
cue-115
so essentially I've been involved of course in scientific publishing for quite awhile - a couple of decades now, and I've seen it first from the side of the authors in many different journals. I've also seen it from the side of more of the editorial boards in the last decade or something, [to] see how it all goes.
cue-116
Essentially, through my experience as an author and also as an editor I kind of developed some feelings that maybe the system as it was set up was not ideal. I was really thinking about all aspects of publishing here so starting from the actual editorial process itself, the review process also, about the kind of ownership of the of the work, copyright question, the questions of using technology to maybe move forward and kind of update it to something more modern than the tradition, how also
cue-117
post-publication evaluation of publications occurs and so on, metrification, et cetera, and how it influences the
cue-118
careers of scientists. So I mean I have always been a great fan of the arxiv. I've always viewed the arxiv as
cue-119
an example of an extremely well-identified problem, a narrow problem, but then an extremely well-implemented solution for it. So all the preprints essentially
cue-120
go through the arxiv in my field, in my art, it's not true of every single area
cue-121
but in my case it's mostly true and I think this is delivered immense acceleration to scientific communication that's really
cue-122
competely changed the dynamics of the execution of research and maybe the reorientation that you have, a lot of new information, so that's been extremely positive. So at some point I thought why not make a whole system based on an extension of the arXiv?
cue-123
I think that misses, that's missing on the arXiv is of course peer refereeing layer. Many people have argued that we should go
cue-124
without this anyway, but I do believe that there is a
cue-125
an advantage scientifically to a peer refereeing process where input can be made and improvements can be implemented on papers.
cue-126
so
cue-127
so I had some discussions with many colleagues including people who have been involved with the arxiv. I was trying to float the idea of some arXiv plus plus
cue-128
where we would have a complete system from preprints to peer review to post publication metadata handling and maintenance, essentially run by the community, owned by the community, and without all these financial shenanigans we're currently facing
cue-129
in the industry. So
cue-130
I mean strategically it became
cue-131
the choice to just do it separately from the arXiv. The people I talked to said that the mission of the arxiv was very well defined and it was just better to do this on top of it, or you know on the side of it, and that's why I decided to start implementing it as a separate organization
cue-132
based on that not for profit foundation in the Netherlands.
cue-133
So a lot of work went into thinking how it should be set up and a lot of that thinking actually involves looking at past initiatives,
cue-134
past journals that have been started, or maybe other initiatives that have tried to make some progress publishing reform, and trying to identify why they maybe have not taken off as much as as they could have done.
cue-135
So at some point I became quite ambitious and decided that the kind of theme behind SciPost is that we're going to reform everything about publishing!
cue-136
We're going to do everything differently from the the refereeing, to the
cue-137
organizational structures behind it, to the decisional structures behind it, to the financial structures behind, et cetera. That's what gave form to, if you want, the first principles that were behind the organization, and more recently I've kind of sharpened those into what I call these genuine open access principles. So if you want, SciPost tries to do its business, its work in order to fulfill all these ideas in there.
cue-138
So you know partly it was motivated out of frustration with the existing system - frustration both with the editorial processes and the quality of the peer review, the criteria that were used in peer review,
cue-139
the detrimental aspects of peer review sometimes.
cue-140
So personally one of my experiences at some point, I mean my group we had what I think was the best scientific results in my group from possibly, you know, five or ten years, and we tried to put it in very high caliber journals, but were were never able to do that because of this, because of that, didn't fit with journal perspectives and
cue-141
this kind of thing and we kept having to rewrite the version once again to try to communicate that according to a different style to fit with the journal, et cetera, and at some point I took a step back and I actually
cue-142
looked at the planning schedule and I noticed that we had spent more time writing and re-writing the paper and arguing with referees than the time we have done actually
cue-143
conceiving and implementing and realizing the research and I vowed myself never to do that again.
cue-144
So that was a kind of great, frustrating motivation behind it,
cue-145
and it's also what's a lead to the design of the more open refereeing system that we have at SciPost.
cue-146
And then also there's the question of the whole, the business side of it.
cue-147
For me of course the not for profit aspect is quite important because I think the value of the scientific publications mostly comes from the work that the scientist puts in there. There is of course added value to having a bit of formatting and that checking all these things, but these are things that can be greatly automatized and systematized, so I think I wanted to kind of give back the the weight of the emphasis to
cue-148
the scientists behind it all. That was a bit of the idea
cue-149
- a kind of community owned and community driven enterprise.
cue-150
So that's kind of a start of it. And then of course what happened is that I - I mean I have the technical skills to implement the thing myself, so I started coding the site by myself, and polished it bit by running some beta versions with colleagues where I'm from, until I finally released it. And then it's grown into what it is today with the help of some colleagues around Amsterdam. In particular one of my
cue-151
master's students actually walked into my office one day and shouted at me: are you the guy behind SciPost? And I said, yeah, yeah, okay and so I thought that he was going to do something bad or something. But no - he said look I'm like a semi-professional web programmer. I do that on the side of my studies to pay for everything. I want to work for you! And I told him well, I have no money to give you. And he said I don't care! I want to work for you! Let's do this together! So ever since I've been kind of coding the stuff with him. So his name is [Johann de ???], we're kind of the two evil programmers behind the whole infrastructure.
cue-152
cue-153
So that's about that how it started. Then of course there was a lot of work at the beginning to try to convince scientists to participate and get involved in this. So from the very beginning essentially the idea behind SciPost has been to leverage openness for quality. So we
cue-154
we try to view ourselves as a quite high-caliber journal. The thing that we try to achieve with this is that first of all it makes it more appealing for scientists to send their good work there.
cue-155
And second, by concentrating on, if you want, the the top tier of the publications we can start the operations with a lower volume than the asymptotic volume that we would like to reach.
cue-156
So that's a little bit part of our growth strategy, if you want. So the growth strategy is to start from the top down
cue-157
in terms of size scaling things up.
cue-158
So before or while I was implementing it also I discussed with many other people who had started similar initiatives. In particular I got extremely useful input from Ulrich Pöschl from Germany, who was the one behind the journal called Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics that you might know.
cue-159
It's published by Copernicus Publications. And essentially this was an extremely pioneering journal in
cue-160
in terms of open refereeing. So I discussed that quite a lot with Ulrich and that really kind of
cue-161
helped crystallize the referreing format that we have at SciPost which is a variation of what happens in
cue-162
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, and in the meantime others also.
cue-163
So that's a little bit the kind of grand story behind it.
cue-164
Great! Thank you J. S.
cue-165
So
cue-166
let's go ahead with questions.
cue-167
Go ahead and shout out
cue-168
if you have questions, and I think we can
cue-169
go from there and see.
cue-170
Maybe leave five or ten minutes at the end to kind of wrap up with
cue-171
what we've learned and where to go from here.
cue-172
So
cue-173
this is David. I have a question. So you're not an arXiv overlay journal. Is that right? You actually are your own archive, your only preprint server that people submit to?So at the moment we're still working with the arXiv. So in order to process a submission we require the submitters to actually put their version on the arXiv.
cue-174
the the reason why we do this at the moment is that if we know that the paper's on the arXiv, we know that essentially everybody worldwide has seen it.
cue-175
And if the authors have kind of used our templates then it's clear for everybody that this was submitted to SciPost. And then once the habits and knowledge about SciPost will have spread further, people will know that they can contribute to the refereeing effort. That's the idea.
cue-176
And so at the moment, we do have a kind of separate preprint server in the background, but we're not using it yet. We will be using it for things that can't go on the arxiv. So for example perhaps lecture notes, more of a kind of Bachelor level or things like that. So we do use the arxiv
cue-177
for its purpose, namely to handle the preprints, but the publication itself is actually placed on our servers. So we do all the hosting, the metadata management, et cetera et cetera. So in that sense, what I say is that SciPost is not an overlay journal. It essentially works like every single other journal that you have. They host their own material. They maintain everything. Yeah so in that sense SciPost is not overlay journal.
cue-178
Okay, let me ask a followup about sustainability. So as far as I know, arxiv does not yet have a sustainable business model, so where do you see yourself
cue-179
solving that problem?Yeah so this is perhaps the single greatest problem that we have long term.
cue-180
Essentially I can tell you much more about the kind of financial situation at the moment. First of all about about the arXiv, yes, so the arXiv essentially
cue-181
I mean if you look at their budget numbers, something of the order of eight hundred thousand, nine hundred thousand a year to actually run the whole thing and develop it. They got recently some extra grants to implement some improvements. That's why we've got this new search engine for at that moment, et cetera, et cetera.
cue-182
So
cue-183
the the arxiv itself does not have a permanent endowment ensuring its continued existence. However, in terms of the sustainability of the arXiv, I trust very much in the community, and I would imagine that if things were to go from bad to worse, I don't know, so Paul Ginsbarg gives up the ghost and you know suddenly it stops working. I'm sure that the community would rally together and just resuscitate the arXiv precisely as it is because it's an infrastructure that's really proven its worth and we want it to be maintained. And in fact I would say if the arxiv were to, you know, completely fall down then I would do my best via SciPost just to take it over. I don't think we're going to we're going to get there. I think the arXiv is going to be okay, but it's always contingent on continued support from institutions.
cue-184
Now about SciPost: so the business model that we have with is extremely challenging. So we have this model whereby we would like academic institutions worldwide, so that includes universities, the libraries, research institutes, funding agencies.
cue-185
We would like these institutions to provide basic means for us to run our infrastructure and what we
cue-186
what we don't want to do is to link the actual editorial process and the editorial workflow to the finances. So currently we have this big model, this big transition in the publishing business from the subscription journals into the APC based model. I've actually,
cue-187
so I guess I can say it: I'm against the APC model.
cue-188
I think it's not a good model. It encourages a lots of almost malpractice as the proliferation of these predatory open access journals as shown over the last few years. It links editorial decisions the financial consequences everywhere. It's kind of not the right way to do it.
cue-189
cue-190
The the thing that we want to implement, if you want, is a pooling mechanism whereby from these basic funds that institutions give us, we run the whole infrastructure without looking exactly in microscopic detail where the money is spent. So we're going to run the refereeing processes. We're gonna perform the production of the papers with what we have.
cue-191
If I look at our operations at the moment, my estimate is that we can be sustainable with infrastructure if we operate on a baseline of between three hundred and four hundred euros per publication on average. Of course there are short publications. There are longer publications. There are publications that have an extremely complicated refereeing process. There are other publications that go like through butter and are easy, so publication is not a proper financial unit.
cue-192
So one of the reasons why we think that we can perform great economies on all of this is first of all: we don't have thirty seven or eighty percent profit margins. We don't have a huge accounting later that tries to count all those peanuts left and right and tries to send invoices all over the place. What we would like is for institutions to compile a little bit the number of publications that they can associate to themselves through SciPost and then provide us yearly donations to match the expenses corresponding to these things. So that is the dream. So it's not yet the reality.
cue-193
Our our model for the finances is partly based on the on the arXiv which also tries to pool contributions. It's also based on other initiatives that are more recent than the arXiv that use such a similar consortial scheme. You might be familiar with the Open Library of Humanities?
cue-194
Maybe you've talked to Martin Eve in one of your meetings as well? So he's somebody who also has written about these consortial funding models and has really, you know,
cue-195
convincingly argued that they are much cheaper solution to go for. Although they have disadvantages, the sum of their advantages is financially much more attractive than the current models that we have.
cue-196
So at the moment we're trying to convince institutions to support us,
cue-197
and it's always a little bit of chicken before the egg. At the very beginning, when I started SciPost, institutions were telling me, well okay, you know, set your journal up, run it, and once it's running we will see if we support you. So that means that the whole thing had to be developed essentially without the financial backbone, without financial guarantees, without
cue-198
good prospects for the future. Lots and...it's been a lot of pro bono work - unpaid - in order to do that.
cue-199
Trust is that now that the infrastructure is running and slowly being scaled up, the institutions will feel, if you want, morally compelled to support it. And one of the things I would like to
cue-200
see from institutions, at some point, is the realization that by supporting our alternative model for the publishing infrastructure, they have an extremely powerful lever to try to change the existing infrastructure, you know bring the costs down, change the conditions, give much more power to the community, and the libraries, and institutions, and the funders.
cue-201
Yeah, so that was kind of a long answer that you were to your question, but if you have more specific things, questions about it, I can also answer them.
cue-202
I have one along that same - with that in mind. With it becoming an institution essentially institution-funded eventually, where would that leave someone working outside of an institution in terms of interaction with SciPost?
cue-203
So first of all, all the content of SciPost is completely openly accessible. So somebody can certainly
cue-204
peruse and download all the material that we have. Now for the actual contributions which are defined by publications, referee reports, also comments, we actually have the concept of what we call a contributor and a contributor is defined as somebody that has to be a professionally active scientist. So that's somebody with at least a position corresponding to a PhD students and above.
cue-205
So in that sense we're not completely open. But the the reason it's like that is to essentially guarantee that the comments are going to be placed on the on the papers come from people within the field with the sufficient expertise to do that. And this was an extremely important criteria on that was underlined by the scientists that we surveyed at the beginning when we tried to convince them that these open refereeing methods were the way forward. They were always afraid that essentially anybody could comment on these things and essentially maybe their fear was that this would bring the the quality down.
cue-206
So in that sense, if you want, SciPost is not completely open.
cue-207
I could imagine a future in which, for example,
cue-208
we could open up to a larger audience if they want to ask questions about particular things. And then we have that. So we have, if you want, plans in the background that consider such things. But we didn't want to release that at first because it would probably confuse the mission of SciPost in the minds of scientists. So that we leave for the future.
cue-209
May I ask one follow-on question with that? So would the commenters need to be from that same field of study then?
cue-210
Not necessarily.
cue-211
No so we don't force that. So at the moment we're only operating within physics.
cue-212
So the only journals that we have are within physics. However it is entirely possible for somebody working in gravitation and cosmology making, maybe, working on non-linear dynamical systems - it's entirely possible for that person to make a comment or ask a question on a paper in mathematical physics, doing that from a different perspective or even in many-body condensed matter. This is possible.
cue-213
Okay
cue-214
So I have a kind of a more general question along those lines.
cue-215
I know you're working with the arXiv, but I am wondering if you could kind of explain a little bit more how your refereeing process works
cue-216
behind the scenes?yeah okay
cue-217
It's relatively simple. It goes through a number of steps. So
cue-218
maybe the first thing to explain is that we have decisional
cue-219
structure within SciPost which is based on what we call the editorial college.
cue-220
So the editorial college is a collection of professional academics of relatively senior level so that the vast majority of them are full professor and, you know, even senior full professors in various fields. You can find a list of them on our about page. And the idea is that all publication decisions at SciPost are taken by the editorial college.
cue-221
So there's no publication decision which is taken by a single
cue-222
editor or fellow as we call them.
cue-223
So what happens is that when an author wants to submit to SciPost, the very first step
cue-224
is to deposit the preprint on the arXiv.
cue-225
And then once the preprint has appeared on the arXiv, so when it has its official arXiv number, then the person who submits it, of course has to be registered at SciPost, but then you just fill in a submission form which is extremely simple because you just get the arXiv number with the version and then the system kind of reads - it talks to the arXiv API to fetch all the metadata associated to it,
cue-226
and then just submits the paper. So then the paper enters what we call the pre-screening phase. So the pre-screening phase mostly consists of a two things: first of all, a plagiarism check which is anyway run by the arXiv but we actually run a separate one independently.
cue-227
at SciPost.
cue-228
And if all is well with that, then our editorial administration proceeds to what we call the assignments phase. So that's within the pre-screening. So what we do is that we contact the fellows that we have within the college who specialization matches the specialization of the submission, and ask them if they want to become editor-in-charge of that particular submission. They do not have to accept. They can refuse because they're too busy, because they're not interested, et cetera. But we do wait until one of our fellows has taken charge of the submission.
cue-229
If none of the fellows take charge of the submission, then the paper can be, if you want like desk rejected - rejected at that stage. Then we say that the pre-screening has failed and the paper is, if you want, released back to the authors and then not processed further by SciPost. So this does not happen very often. I don't have the exact statistics here in front of my eyes, but you're talking maybe about one paper and twenty or something or one submission and twenty. Okay, so now we reached the stage where one of our fellows has decided to take charge of the submission and becomes editor-in-charge. So this fellow then has access to a special page that we call the editorial page that contains all the tools to handle the refereeing process.
cue-230
Primarily the means just inviting referees. So essentially the the fellow in charge will invite a number of referees to explicitly look at the submission and provide a report.
cue-231
Now we do not limit ourselves to reports which are obtained through explicit invitations for refereeing from the editor-in-charge.
cue-232
Once the paper has been taken charge of by one of our fellows, what we call the submission page becomes publicly accessible. That is, if you look at the SciPost site, you'll see submissions. And the submissions that you see there are undergoing refereeing. They have an editor-in-charge.
cue-233
If you are a registered contributor to SciPost, you can contribute a report or a comment during the refereeing phase. So these contributed reports which are then just, you know, anybody who was registered can provide those, these are also taken into account in the editorial processing,
cue-234
and they way into the editorial decision also.
cue-235
So we run refereeing periods of four weeks. We try to keep everybody on time. This is also an extreme challenge to kind of keep up the tempo and make sure to minimize the delays, but then when the reports have been obtained, it's the duty of editor-in-charge to formulate an editorial recommendation. So this is going to be a recommendation for maybe a minor or a major revision,
cue-236
it could be a recommendation for rejection or for acceptance. The important thing is that if it is a recommendation for acceptance or rejection, then the recommendation is only a recommendation. It's forwarded to the editorial college and then there's a voting which is organized within the editorial college. So the fellows that have
cue-237
specialist knowledge of this area get to vote on the
cue-238
on the submission, whether it's accepted or or rejected. So these decisions are taken
cue-239
communally like that, based on the recommendation of the editor-in-charge.
cue-240
And then once the paper is, while it's rejected, it's rejected. If it's accepted, then at that stage, once the editorial college decision is fixed, the submission is forwarded to the production stream workflow that we have. We have a little production team that produces the proofs of the papers, and then I send them to the authors. We converge, and finally when theproofs are converged, we proceed with publication of the manuscript, deposition of metadata et cetera.
cue-241
So that's the workflow, if you want.
cue-242
Which of these things are public? At a referee's report, who voted which way on acceptance, and so on, the versions, all that?
cue-243
The contents of the reports are public. The referees can elect to remain anonymous or to waive anonymity. The voting at the college and the discussions at the college level are not made public.
cue-244
okay thanks
cue-245
thank you. So my
cue-246
next question: I think it's only at that point when the
cue-247
the papers are then in the production stream, or however you said it, that people can make comments on them? Is that the...?During the refereeing phase people can make comments on them
cue-248
And that's on the commentary section of your
cue-249
site?
cue-255
Okay now now it's better yeah. So there are two separate sections on the site. There's a commentaries section. So this is a section which allows registered contributors to comment on published literature.
cue-256
So that can be a paper at SciPost. It can also be a paper in Nature or any journal whatsoever, even an old paper or whatnot.
cue-257
So in that case what we do is we have a separate commentary page for a published paper. We don't host the published paper we just we just have a link to the published paper, but then the contributors can actually provide comments onto those papers there. So if you want...
cue-258
So that's completely separate than your refereeing track.That's correct. Yeah. so
cue-259
if you want, we have code inside that's able to manage comments. So this is used in the commentary section, but it's also used in our submissions section. So submissions - these are the papers that are under consideration for publication inSciPost.
cue-260
And then for the papers that are undergoing refereeing, it is possible during the refereeing phase for general people also are registered contributors, anybody, can actually contribute a report
cue-261
or a comment. So the idea behind this is that sometimes as a researcher you wake up in the morning and then you see on the arXiv a paper whose contents you can very easily comment upon or maybe give some suggestions. But if you happen not to be one of those three or four referees that are invited to
cue-262
cue-263
referee this paper, then you don't have the chance to give your opinion on. So at SciPost we give this opportunity. So if you see the paper submitted at SciPost, you know that you can contribute something to it even though you're not explicitly invited by the editor-in-charge.
cue-264
so but these comments, areAnd that stays with the...oh sorry
cue-265
Just for clarification: so those comments, are they moderated by the editor? or they can just...?
cue-266
So we have a vetting procedure.
cue-267
That means that when the comment is submitted, at first it's not publicly available but somebody has to look at it. So either our editorial administration or the editor in charge of the submission will look at the comment, ascertain that no abusive language is used, that sort of thing, and if that's the case then the thing will be
cue-268
the thing will be put online, after vetting.
cue-269
But that was an interesting discussion that I had with Ulrich Pöschl because they also have, of course, these open comments and open refereeing on their submissions, and he told me that this vetting procedure was actually completely superfluous because they have the history of thirty thousand comments on the papers and only two or three have proven problematic.
cue-270
So he thought I was being too conservative on that. But nonetheless I decided to keep the vetting because I don't...
cue-271
you know, I want to encourage a high level on these things and sometimes we return the comments to the authors of the comments and say you know yeah bring up the level a bit here and there and then we'll publish it.
cue-272
and they stay with the submission right? Like they end up connected with it in the end?
cue-273
So if you look at the submission page, the submission page contains the information about the submission, the link to the arXiv, and then it contains also the reports and the comments that are deposited there. So all these things are together on the same web page. But once the paper is published, then of course only
cue-274
the paper itself forms the version of record of the article.
cue-275
And the reports, we actually give a DOI to, so if you want, the reports we also want to bring up in level up to something that the referees can get credit for. So we attach a DOI to the reports of the published papers, but also to the comments if they are substantial.
cue-276
And the comments, I haven't stumbled on one yet that had comments. Are they able to be done both during the refereeing and after? I think you already said this, but I just wanted to make sure that ISo the reports can be submitted during refereeing and the comments can be submitted anytime.
cue-277
okay okay that's what I thought you said and I just wanted to make sure that II understand it's a little bit confusing.
cue-278
and my comments would show up just like the
cue-279
reports do on a submission right just below it or whatever on the published one?yeah, yeah. So what you'll find very typically is that so you'll have some reports attached to a submission, and then typically it will be a comment from the authors. So the authors are allowed to reply to reports.
cue-280
okay
cue-281
So we call those, I mean they are comments, but we give them a special name. We call them author replies
cue-282
because it's an author's response to a report. Soo we we have many of those.
cue-283
thank you.
cue-284
Can I ask you a very kind of probably fairly random question? But just for my understanding as I'm looking at things? When you go into a submission. I'm looking at ones that have been published.
cue-285
often the authors are...
cue-286
there will be one or two that are darker
cue-287
writing and then the others are lighter? What is that differentiation?So this is the differentiation between authors who actually have an account at SciPost and others who don't.
cue-288
okay
cue-289
The ones that don't have a link, we we have them in the database as unregistered authors, so we don't have any information about their ORCiD or whatever else, whereas the others, we have all information. And then in particular we can link to maybe other publications that they have, comments that they've put, and things like that. So if you click on one of these names, you'll be taken to the kind of page for that person. It's a bit like on the arXiv if you do a keyword search for somebody's name.
cue-290
One, may I ask another question that's unrelated but when you turn down something, when something either in the very beginning, when it's desk-denied or whatever - it's just not picked up anyone,
cue-291
or in the end when it is recommended that it be rejected,
cue-292
what happens with those submissions? Do they remain anywhere on SciPost or do they kind of disappear from SciPost at that point?
cue-293
So at the moment for the ones that are rejected during the pre-screening phase, then, if you want, they've never become public on SciPost anyways so
cue-294
so you don't see them. It might be that the in the arXiv submission they have written, you know, submitted to SciPost and things like that, so then you can understand it went through pre-screening but didn't go further
cue-295
but then we don't host anything there. If the rejection occurs after a refereeing phase, then once the rejection decision is fixed by the college,
cue-296
we in principle remove everything. So we do give the authors the possibility of keeping all these things public.
cue-297
so it's happened, for example, that some authors wanted to still have the the reports available like this in order to accelerate processing somewhere else, but if the authors prefer not to see those things again, because of course in those circumstances typically the reports are more critical and
cue-298
point out problems, and we do give the authors of the submission the decision as to whether the things stay online or not. But the default is that the things are taken offline.
cue-299
okay
cue-300
I have another question about sustainability. So you would explain that...you'd like it that
cue-301
institutions or whoever would pay a small amount of money
cue-302
to SciPost.
cue-303
Now currently you have three journals. So I'm just trying to do a quick calculation in my head. If all the paid journals out there were partitioned out in groups of three to different organizations, and all these organizations
cue-304
we're going to be supported in various ways. That seems unlikely to me.
cue-305
And so then I conclude SciPost needs to host hundreds of journals in order for this model to be sustainable. So how do you respond to this?yeah. So essentially the idea is that we ask a small amount from institutions. So we ask for a thousand euros per year just to kind of get started.
cue-306
Now
cue-307
so to kind of get a get a better idea of what we're thinking of for now, you can also look at a thing which we put online very recently. So I called it expansion and sustainability drive. If you go to our homepage you'll see a link to it in the top right. In there you have some stated goals for of the the coming year.
cue-308
So we have two big objectives. The first objective is that we want to scale up our editorial college to two hundred fellows and more.
cue-309
And the second goal is that we want to scale up our supporting partners boards to the equivalent of two hundred partners. And this would allow us to process, according to current estimates, about five hundred papers a year.
cue-310
So this is to get things started, if you want. To kind of converge on to this. Now let me speculate about the longer term future and how I would like to have it.
cue-311
So we would keep having our partners that would be the the institutions worldwide, and they would give us this kind of standard
cue-312
on the scale of the thousand euro a year contribution so that we could have a bit of a team running the infrastructure, the base of the infrastructure.
cue-313
Now, what I would like to have is a mechanism which is a little bit like scope three if you're familiar with that.
cue-314
no
cue-315
So okay then - two-second explanation about scope three. Scope three
cue-316
is a mechanism whereby publishers of high-energy physics papers get their, if you want, article processing charges paid for centrally. So the authors of papers and high energy physics don't have to solve themselves, you know give their own credit card or arrange payment from their own institution, in order to publish open access in the list of journals that are within the scope three arrangement. So it's all centralized at CERN. But it is only for
cue-317
high-energy physics. And the way they work in a kind of a first approximation is that they look at the publication level of the publishers that they have within the agreement and then they say, okay so for next year publisher X is going to get that much money
cue-318
to publish all the high energy papers that will be thrown at them.
cue-319
And then the year after, they re-adjust, and then the year after they kind of readjust and redistribute and things like that. So what I would envision for the future would be something like this. So we would scale our operations up and then what we would do is for example at the end of a publication year, we could tell institution X that they were associated to the equivalent of that many publications.
cue-320
And then we look at our operational costs and see how much it is, and then the contribution that we would expect from that institution would match this.
cue-321
Well now the problem here is that you have a lot of institutional free riders, so you'd need typically to get like a bit more of that. But the
cue-322
the general idea would be that. So we're kind of thinking about like a bronze, silver, and gold versions of partners that give us either, you know,
cue-323
just the equivalent of what they received, or a bit more, or much more, and then try to be sustainable on that. The kind of idea is that we want to we want to cut the costs down quite a lot as compared to the current norm.
cue-324
I mean if you take the number of
cue-325
papers that are published worldwide, if you take the expenditure of universities worldwide, you come to these numbers like five thousand euros for publication.
cue-326
And a norm for open access publications is...it was about fifteen fifteen hundred euros, now it's rapidly increasing. Some places it's twenty four hundred, fifty two hundred, and things like that. So we want to kind of bring those costs down quite substantially by running this more centralized infrastructure.
cue-327
But the idea of - the base of the idea would still be our supporting partners board.
cue-328
so I'm gonna have to cut in here. We have one minute left.
cue-329
okaythis has been a great discussion.
cue-330
So I guess
cue-331
what I would kind of like to see maybe going into next week,
cue-332
as you think about that, if you're available for next week J-S,
cue-333
I am drawn to a question that Ben Upton asked you in your interview that you shared on
cue-334
your blog.yeah
cue-335
and he asked: ultimately
cue-336
don't we want quite a centralized publishing system rather than a large number of partially overlapping very poor quality hard to find platforms? So
cue-337
what I want to think about I guess for this next week is how do you see, like what is your understanding of the
cue-338
the future in a more macro scale
cue-339
in the Scholarly Commons? How do you see initiatives like yours
cue-340
working together?yeah
cue-341
and generally to get some more of your perspective on the Scholarly Commons from what you
cue-342
even just from the idea: if we could start over what would it look like?
cue-343
yeah
cue-344
So
cue-345
I'm
cue-348
and I'm going to miss this next week also.Or we can plan for that in two weeks from now that work better for you.
cue-349
Let me see...two weeks from now...
cue-350
Oh no that Tuesday doesn't work
cue-352
Should we utilize the document that has been created to continue the conversation in the meantime? or just to gather thoughts for that next call whenever that will be able to happen?
cue-353
So on my side for a call, maybe the next sure opportunity would be nineteenth of June. I think I could make that.
cue-354
I think I'll be back by that time.okay
cue-355
So we can see. But otherwise indeed we could we could use the documents to do that. So in a sense it's easier just talking...
cue-356
right
cue-357
...but maybe I could put some kind of
cue-358
bullet points set in there.
cue-359
Yeah. Let's...
cue-360
I think using the document is great, but let's also plan, if you're okay with the nineteenth of June,
cue-361
that would work great for us too.
cue-362
Okay. Let me pre-book it and then I'll confirm in the meantime.great
cue-363
I think there are a lot of things to think about with what you've talked about today and
cue-364
yeahwith the Scholarly Commons.
cue-365
We
cue-366
can be working on questions too.
cue-367
And anyone that is coming coming up with questions
cue-368
also feel free to add
cue-369
to the SciPost document
cue-370
and we can address those during calls or off
cue-371
cue-372
yeahin more asynchronouslyyeahsounds good, sounds good
cue-373
okay
cue-374
thank you so much J-S and
cue-375
alright thank you it's great to meet you all and to chat about all these things. And I think clearly we still have much to talk about so let's keep it up.
cue-376
Great! Okay,
cue-377
thank you and
cue-378
we'll look forward to next time.
cue-379
Okay! Thank you very much.
cue-380
Alright, thank you
cue-381
thanks, bye!